           Skip to content  Ontario.ca   Français   Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Rural Affairs                     Home  About  Agriculture  Food  Rural  Research  Publications  News  Contact                Engineering    Agricultural Structures   Air Quality  Energy Conservation and Generation  Environment  Farm Mechanization   Farm Safety  Normal Farm Practices  Nutrient Management  Soils  Water        Topics    Agriculture  Food  Rural  Research & Innovation  Food Safety  Crops  Livestock  Environment  Programs & Resources   Agencies, Boards & Commissions         Explore Government        Resources    Agricultural Information Contact Centre  Foodland Ontario  Invest in Ontario  Statistics  Farm Property Class Tax Rate Program  Inspection Programs  Accessibility  Job Opportunities  ServiceOntario        Contacts    Have a Question?  Agricultural Information 
                Contact Centre 1-877-424-1300  Email Updates  Telephone Directory  ServiceOntario Locations  Ministry Locations  Twitter               Print     Share          Soil Erosion – Causes 
              and Effects          Agdex#:   572/751     Publication Date:   10/2012     Order#:   12-053     Last Reviewed:   December 2018     History:   Replaces OMAFRA Factsheet, 
                  Soil Erosion – Causes and Effects, Order No. 87-040     Written by:   Jim Ritter, P. Eng. - 
                  Engineer, Soil Management       PDF Version - 
              2.81 MB  As part of providing accessible 
              customer service , please email the Agricultural Information 
              Contact Centre ( ag.info.omafra@ontario.ca ) 
              if you require communication supports or alternate formats of this 
              publication.  Table of Contents   Water Erosion  Forms of Water Erosion  Effects of Water Erosion  Wind Erosion  Effects of Wind Erosion  Tillage Erosion  Effects of Tillage Erosion  Conservation Measures  Summary  Resources   Soil erosion is a naturally occurring process that affects all 
                landforms. In agriculture, soil erosion refers to the wearing 
                away of a field's topsoil by the natural physical forces of water 
                ( Figure 1 ) and wind ( Figure 2 ) 
                or through forces associated with farming activities such as tillage.  Erosion, whether it is by water, wind or tillage, involves three 
                distinct actions – soil detachment, movement and deposition. 
                Topsoil, which is high in organic matter, fertility and soil life, 
                is relocated elsewhere "on-site" where it builds up over time 
                or is carried "off-site" where it fills in drainage channels. 
                Soil erosion reduces cropland productivity and contributes to 
                the pollution of adjacent watercourses, wetlands and lakes.  Soil erosion can be a slow process that continues relatively 
                unnoticed or can occur at an alarming rate, causing serious loss 
                of topsoil. Soil compaction, low organic matter, loss of soil 
                structure, poor internal drainage, salinisation and soil acidity 
                problems are other serious soil degradation conditions that can 
                accelerate the soil erosion process.  This Factsheet looks at the causes and effects of water, wind 
                and tillage erosion on agricultural land.   Figure 1. The erosive force of water from concentrated surface water runoff.  Water Erosion  The widespread occurrence of water erosion combined with the 
                severity of on-site and off-site impacts have made water erosion 
                the focus of soil conservation efforts in Ontario.  The rate and magnitude of soil erosion by water is controlled 
                by the following factors:  Rainfall and Runoff  The greater the intensity and duration of a rainstorm, the higher 
                the erosion potential. The impact of raindrops on the soil surface 
                can break down soil aggregates and disperse the aggregate material. 
                Lighter aggregate materials such as very fine sand, silt, clay 
                and organic matter are easily removed by the raindrop splash and 
                runoff water; greater raindrop energy or runoff amounts are required 
                to move larger sand and gravel particles.  Soil movement by rainfall (raindrop splash) is usually greatest 
                and most noticeable during short-duration, high-intensity thunderstorms. 
                Although the erosion caused by long-lasting and less-intense storms 
                is not usually as spectacular or noticeable as that produced during 
                thunderstorms, the amount of soil loss can be significant, especially 
                when compounded over time.   Figure 2. The erosive force of wind on an open field.  Surface water runoff occurs whenever there is excess water on 
                a slope that cannot be absorbed into the soil or is trapped on 
                the surface. Reduced infiltration due to soil compaction, crusting 
                or freezing increases the runoff. Runoff from agricultural land 
                is greatest during spring months when the soils are typically 
                saturated, snow is melting and vegetative cover is minimal.  Soil Erodibility  Soil erodibility is an estimate of the ability of soils to resist 
                erosion, based on the physical characteristics of each soil. Texture 
                is the principal characteristic affecting erodibility, but structure, 
                organic matter and permeability also contribute. Generally, soils 
                with faster infiltration rates, higher levels of organic matter 
                and improved soil structure have a greater resistance to erosion. 
                Sand, sandy loam and loam-textured soils tend to be less erodible 
                than silt, very fine sand and certain clay-textured soils.  Tillage and cropping practices that reduce soil organic matter 
                levels, cause poor soil structure, or result in soil compaction, 
                contribute to increases in soil erodibility. As an example, compacted 
                subsurface soil layers can decrease infiltration and increase 
                runoff. The formation of a soil crust, which tends to "seal" the 
                surface, also decreases infiltration. On some sites, a soil crust 
                might decrease the amount of soil loss from raindrop impact and 
                splash; however, a corresponding increase in the amount of runoff 
                water can contribute to more serious erosion problems.  Past erosion also has an effect on a soil's erodibility. Many 
                exposed subsurface soils on eroded sites tend to be more erodible 
                than the original soils were because of their poorer structure 
                and lower organic matter. The lower nutrient levels often associated 
                with subsoils contribute to lower crop yields and generally poorer 
                crop cover, which in turn provides less crop protection for the 
                soil.  Slope Gradient and Length  The steeper and longer the slope of a field, the higher the risk 
                for erosion. Soil erosion by water increases as the slope length 
                increases due to the greater accumulation of runoff. Consolidation 
                of small fields into larger ones often results in longer slope 
                lengths with increased erosion potential, due to increased velocity 
                of water, which permits a greater degree of scouring (carrying 
                capacity for sediment).  Cropping and Vegetation  The potential for soil erosion increases if the soil has no or 
                very little vegetative cover of plants and/or crop residues. Plant 
                and residue cover protects the soil from raindrop impact and splash, 
                tends to slow down the movement of runoff water and allows excess 
                surface water to infiltrate.  The erosion-reducing effectiveness of plant and/or crop residues 
                depends on the type, extent and quantity of cover. Vegetation 
                and residue combinations that completely cover the soil and intercept 
                all falling raindrops at and close to the surface are the most 
                efficient in controlling soil erosion (e.g., forests, permanent 
                grasses). Partially incorporated residues and residual roots are 
                also important as these provide channels that allow surface water 
                to move into the soil.  The effectiveness of any protective cover also depends on how 
                much protection is available at various periods during the year, 
                relative to the amount of erosive rainfall that falls during these 
                periods. Crops that provide a full protective cover for a major 
                portion of the year (e.g., alfalfa or winter cover crops) can 
                reduce erosion much more than can crops that leave the soil bare 
                for a longer period of time (e.g., row crops), particularly during 
                periods of highly erosive rainfall such as spring and summer. 
                Crop management systems that favour contour farming and strip-cropping 
                techniques can further reduce the amount of erosion. To reduce 
                most of the erosion on annual row-crop land, leave a residue cover 
                greater than 30% after harvest and over the winter months, or 
                inter-seed a cover crop (e.g., red clover in wheat, oats after 
                silage corn).  Tillage Practices  The potential for soil erosion by water is affected by tillage 
                operations, depending on the depth, direction and timing of plowing, 
                the type of tillage equipment and the number of passes. Generally, 
                the less the disturbance of vegetation or residue cover at or 
                near the surface, the more effective the tillage practice in reducing 
                water erosion. Minimum till or no-till practices are effective 
                in reducing soil erosion by water.  Tillage and other practices performed up and down field slopes 
                creates pathways for surface water runoff and can accelerate the 
                soil erosion process. Cross-slope cultivation and contour farming 
                techniques discourage the concentration of surface water runoff 
                and limit soil movement.  Forms of Water Erosion  Sheet Erosion  Sheet erosion is the movement of soil from raindrop splash and 
                runoff water. It typically occurs evenly over a uniform slope 
                and goes unnoticed until most of the productive topsoil has been 
                lost. Deposition of the eroded soil occurs at the bottom of the 
                slope ( Figure 3 ) or in low areas. Lighter-coloured 
                soils on knolls, changes in soil horizon thickness and low crop 
                yields on shoulder slopes and knolls are other indicators.   Figure 3. The accumulation of soil and crop debris at the lower end of 
                  this field is an indicator of sheet erosion.  Rill Erosion  Rill erosion results when surface water runoff concentrates, 
                forming small yet well-defined channels ( Figure 
                4 ). These distinct channels where the soil has been washed 
                away are called rills when they are small enough to not interfere 
                with field machinery operations. In many cases, rills are filled 
                in each year as part of tillage operations.   Figure 4. The distinct path where the soil has been washed away by surface 
                  water runoff is an indicator of rill erosion.  Gully Erosion  Gully erosion is an advanced stage of rill erosion where surface 
                channels are eroded to the point where they become a nuisance 
                factor in normal tillage operations ( Figure 5 ). 
                There are farms in Ontario that are losing large quantities of 
                topsoil and subsoil each year due to gully erosion. Surface water 
                runoff, causing gully formation or the enlarging of existing gullies, 
                is usually the result of improper outlet design for local surface 
                and subsurface drainage systems. The soil instability of gully 
                banks, usually associated with seepage of groundwater, leads to 
                sloughing and slumping (caving-in) of bank slopes. Such failures 
                usually occur during spring months when the soil water conditions 
                are most conducive to the problem.  Gully formations are difficult to control if corrective measures 
                are not designed and properly constructed. Control measures must 
                consider the cause of the increased flow of water across the landscape 
                and be capable of directing the runoff to a proper outlet. Gully 
                erosion results in significant amounts of land being taken out 
                of production and creates hazardous conditions for the operators 
                of farm machinery.   Figure 5. Gully erosion may develop in locations where rill erosion has 
                  not been managed.  Bank Erosion  Natural streams and constructed drainage channels act as outlets 
                for surface water runoff and subsurface drainage systems. Bank 
                erosion is the progressive undercutting, scouring and slumping 
                of these drainageways ( Figure 6 ). Poor construction 
                practices, inadequate maintenance, uncontrolled livestock access 
                and cropping too close can all lead to bank erosion problems.   Figure 6. Bank 
                  erosion involves the undercutting and scouring of natural stream 
                  and drainage channel banks.  Poorly constructed tile outlets also contribute to bank erosion. 
                Some do not function properly because they have no rigid outlet 
                pipe, have an inadequate splash pad or no splash pad at all, or 
                have outlet pipes that have been damaged by erosion, machinery 
                or bank cave-ins.  The direct damages from bank erosion include loss of productive 
                farmland, undermining of structures such as bridges, increased 
                need to clean out and maintain drainage channels and washing out 
                of lanes, roads and fence rows.  Effects of Water Erosion  On-Site  The implications of soil erosion by water extend beyond the removal 
                of valuable topsoil. Crop emergence, growth and yield are directly 
                affected by the loss of natural nutrients and applied fertilizers. 
                Seeds and plants can be disturbed or completely removed by the 
                erosion. Organic matter from the soil, residues and any applied 
                manure, is relatively lightweight and can be readily transported 
                off the field, particularly during spring thaw conditions. Pesticides 
                may also be carried off the site with the eroded soil.  Soil quality, structure, stability and texture can be affected 
                by the loss of soil. The breakdown of aggregates and the removal 
                of smaller particles or entire layers of soil or organic matter 
                can weaken the structure and even change the texture. Textural 
                changes can in turn affect the water-holding capacity of the soil, 
                making it more susceptible to extreme conditions such as drought.  Off-Site  The off-site impacts of soil erosion by water are not always 
                as apparent as the on-site effects. Eroded soil, deposited down 
                slope, inhibits or delays the emergence of seeds, buries small 
                seedlings and necessitates replanting in the affected areas. Also, 
                sediment can accumulate on down-slope properties and contribute 
                to road damage.  Sediment that reaches streams or watercourses can accelerate 
                bank erosion, obstruct stream and drainage channels, fill in reservoirs, 
                damage fish habitat and degrade downstream water quality. Pesticides 
                and fertilizers, frequently transported along with the eroding 
                soil, contaminate or pollute downstream water sources, wetlands 
                and lakes. Because of the potential seriousness of some of the 
                off-site impacts, the control of "non-point" pollution from agricultural 
                land is an important consideration.  Wind Erosion  Wind erosion occurs in susceptible areas of Ontario but represents 
                a small percentage of land – mainly sandy and organic or 
                muck soils. Under the right conditions it can cause major losses 
                of soil and property ( Figure 7 ).   Figure 7. Wind erosion can be severe on long, unsheltered, smooth soil 
                  surfaces.  Soil particles move in three ways, depending on soil particle 
                size and wind strength – suspension, saltation and surface 
                creep.  The rate and magnitude of soil erosion by wind is controlled 
                by the following factors:  Soil Erodibility  Very fine soil particles are carried high into the air by the 
                wind and transported great distances (suspension). Fine-to-medium 
                size soil particles are lifted a short distance into the air and 
                drop back to the soil surface, damaging crops and dislodging more 
                soil (saltation). Larger-sized soil particles that are too large 
                to be lifted off the ground are dislodged by the wind and roll 
                along the soil surface (surface creep). The abrasion that results 
                from windblown particles breaks down stable surface aggregates 
                and further increases the soil erodibility.  Soil Surface Roughness  Soil surfaces that are not rough offer little resistance to the 
                wind. However, ridges left from tillage can dry out more quickly 
                in a wind event, resulting in more loose, dry soil available to 
                blow. Over time, soil surfaces become filled in, and the roughness 
                is broken down by abrasion. This results in a smoother surface 
                susceptible to the wind. Excess tillage can contribute to soil 
                structure breakdown and increased erosion.  Climate  The speed and duration of the wind have a direct relationship 
                to the extent of soil erosion. Soil moisture levels are very low 
                at the surface of excessively drained soils or during periods 
                of drought, thus releasing the particles for transport by wind. 
                This effect also occurs in freeze-drying of the soil surface during 
                winter months. Accumulation of soil on the leeward side of barriers 
                such as fence rows, trees or buildings, or snow cover that has 
                a brown colour during winter are indicators of wind erosion.  Unsheltered Distance  A lack of windbreaks (trees, shrubs, crop residue, etc.) allows 
                the wind to put soil particles into motion for greater distances, 
                thus increasing abrasion and soil erosion. Knolls and hilltops 
                are usually exposed and suffer the most.  Vegetative Cover  The lack of permanent vegetative cover in certain locations results 
                in extensive wind erosion. Loose, dry, bare soil is the most susceptible; 
                however, crops that produce low levels of residue (e.g., soybeans 
                and many vegetable crops) may not provide enough resistance. In 
                severe cases, even crops that produce a lot of residue may not 
                protect the soil.  The most effective protective vegetative cover consists of a 
                cover crop with an adequate network of living windbreaks in combination 
                with good tillage, residue management and crop selection.  Effects of Wind Erosion  Wind erosion damages crops through sandblasting of young seedlings 
                or transplants, burial of plants or seed, and exposure of seed. 
                Crops are ruined, resulting in costly delays and making reseeding 
                necessary. Plants damaged by sandblasting are vulnerable to the 
                entry of disease with a resulting decrease in yield, loss of quality 
                and market value. Also, wind erosion can create adverse operating 
                conditions, preventing timely field activities.  Soil drifting is a fertility-depleting process that can lead 
                to poor crop growth and yield reductions in areas of fields where 
                wind erosion is a recurring problem. Continual drifting of an 
                area gradually causes a textural change in the soil. Loss of fine 
                sand, silt, clay and organic particles from sandy soils serves 
                to lower the moisture-holding capacity of the soil. This increases 
                the erodibility of the soil and compounds the problem.  The removal of wind-blown soils from fence rows, constructed 
                drainage channels and roads, and from around buildings is a costly 
                process. Also, soil nutrients and surface-applied chemicals can 
                be carried along with the soil particles, contributing to off-site 
                impacts. In addition, blowing dust can affect human health and 
                create public safety hazards.  Tillage Erosion  Tillage erosion is the redistribution of soil through the action 
                of tillage and gravity ( Figure 8 ). It results 
                in the progressive down-slope movement of soil, causing severe 
                soil loss on upper-slope positions and accumulation in lower-slope 
                positions. This form of erosion is a major delivery mechanism 
                for water erosion. Tillage action moves soil to convergent areas 
                of a field where surface water runoff concentrates. Also, exposed 
                subsoil is highly erodible to the forces of water and wind. Tillage 
                erosion has the greatest potential for the "on-site" movement 
                of soil and in many cases can cause more erosion than water or 
                wind.   Figure 8. Tillage erosion involves the progressive down-slope movement of 
                soil.  The rate and magnitude of soil erosion by tillage is controlled 
                by the following factors:  Type of Tillage Equipment  Tillage equipment that lifts and carries will tend to move more 
                soil. As an example, a chisel plow leaves far more crop residue 
                on the soil surface than the conventional moldboard plow but it 
                can move as much soil as the moldboard plow and move it to a greater 
                distance. Using implements that do not move very much soil will 
                help minimize the effects of tillage erosion.  Direction  Tillage implements like a plow or disc throw soil either up or 
                down slope, depending on the direction of tillage. Typically, 
                more soil is moved while tilling in the down-slope direction than 
                while tilling in the up-slope direction.  Speed and Depth  The speed and depth of tillage operations will influence the 
                amount of soil moved. Deep tillage disturbs more soil, while increased 
                speed moves soil further.  Number of Passes  Reducing the number of passes of tillage equipment reduces the 
                movement of soil. It also leaves more crop residue on the soil 
                surface and reduces pulverization of the soil aggregates, both 
                of which can help resist water and wind erosion.  Effects of Tillage Erosion  Tillage erosion impacts crop development and yield. Crop growth 
                on shoulder slopes and knolls is slow and stunted due to poor 
                soil structure and loss of organic matter and is more susceptible 
                to stress under adverse conditions. Changes in soil structure 
                and texture can increase the erodibility of the soil and expose 
                the soil to further erosion by the forces of water and wind.  In extreme cases, tillage erosion includes the movement of subsurface 
                soil. Subsoil that has been moved from upper-slope positions to 
                lower-slope positions can bury the productive topsoil in the lower-slope 
                areas, further impacting crop development and yield. Research 
                related to tillage-eroded fields has shown soil loss of as much 
                as 2 m of depth on upper-slope positions and yield declines 
                of up to 40% in corn. Remediation for extreme cases involves the 
                relocation of displaced soils to the upper-slope positions.  Conservation Measures  The adoption of various soil conservation measures reduces soil 
                erosion by water, wind and tillage. Tillage and cropping practices, 
                as well as land management practices, directly affect the overall 
                soil erosion problem and solutions on a farm. When crop rotations 
                or changing tillage practices are not enough to control erosion 
                on a field, a combination of approaches or more extreme measures 
                might be necessary. For example, contour plowing, strip-cropping 
                or terracing may be considered. In more serious cases where concentrated 
                runoff occurs, it is necessary to include structural controls 
                as part of the overall solution – grassed waterways, drop 
                pipe and grade control structures, rock chutes, and water and 
                sediment control basins.  More details on these and other best management practices can 
                be found in OMAFRA publication BMP 26, Controlling Soil Erosion 
                on the Farm.  Summary  Soil erosion remains a key challenge for Ontario agriculture. 
                Many farmers have already made significant progress in dealing 
                with soil erosion problems on their farms. However, because of 
                continued advances in soil management and crop production technology 
                that have maintained or increased yields in spite of soil erosion, 
                others are not aware of the increasing problem on farmland. Awareness 
                usually occurs only when property is damaged and productive areas 
                of soil are lost.  The increase in extreme weather events predicted with climate 
                change will magnify the existing water and wind erosion situations 
                and create new areas of concern. Farmland must be protected as 
                much as possible, with special attention to higher risk situations 
                that leave the soil vulnerable to erosion.  Resources    OMAFRA Factsheet, Universal 
                Soil Loss Equation (USLE) , Order No. 12-051  BMP 06, Soil Management  BMP 26, Controlling 
                Soil Erosion on the Farm       For more information: Toll Free: 1-877-424-1300 E-mail: ag.info.omafra@ontario.ca           Site Help   Contact Us  Accessibility  Privacy  Help   Notices    © Queen's Printer for Ontario, 2016  Terms of Use     Last Modified:   Accessing this message means you do not have a JavaScript enabled browser. If you
                                            cannot enable JavaScript in your browser and would like to know the last modified
                                            date for this page, please contact the webmaster at - internet.webmaster.omafra@ontario.ca                   